Ninja Rope Game Design Document
Aims
Produce an original, simple approach to general movement control. Try not to use abstract concepts such as health or points to determine victory or any aspect of game play. Everything affecting you as a player should aim to be immediately plausible and understandable from the basic game presented. This is not to say that concepts such as health or experience are bad, but I'd like to point out that these are abstractions to the basic game mechanic, and require extra explanation which is perhaps a little less elegant and less visceral?
Premise
Each player is a Ninja armed with infinite throwing stars and a grapple hook. Ninjas fly through construction sites, forests and jungle gyms with their grapple hooks, shooting at each other with ninja stars in an attempt to cut their ropes and force them to fall to their deaths. The game is played in real/scalable time and can be either 2D or 3D. Both approaches seem legitimate.
Basic Vocabulary
At the beginning of any game type, you stand at the very top of a half built building (i.e. scaffolding and girders everywhere). The round starts, and all parties automatically vault into the air and start to fall. As you fall, you gain speed due to gravity. This speed can be redirected by using your grapple to swing you in a new direction. Aiming your cursor (2D) or crosshair (3D) at a girder and right clicking will instantly launch and connect your grapple hook, and you will begin to swing in an arc as soon as your velocity is perpendicular to your rope. You will reel rope in and out until this condition is met. If the line between you and a girder crosses another girder, then that girder will be the new axis of rotation, unless, of course, you unwind back over it, in which case the old girder is your axis.
Afterwards, once the perpendicular velocity requirement is met, the rope acts as a solid object. You will swing in a perfect circle, unless you lack the velocity to make a full loop, in which case, you will simply swing back round from the apex.
When releasing the right mouse button, you will maintain your current velocity, hopefully being flung back through the air. If the velocity takes you out of the playing field, your Ninja will automatically bounce off the perimeter and back into the game. You may grapple as much as you like. It is not possible to land on girders. They are not "solid".
Energy is always maintained, so while the Ninja has a lot of altitude, he well be very slow, but when he has little altitude, he will be very fast.
At any time, you may aim and fire your ninja stars. These are not used to kill the enemy, but to cut his rope. Direct hits on enemy ninjas will have the same effect as cutting the rope... they will fumble and release their rope, maintaining their current direction. There's no concept of health at this basic level.
Complex Goals
Several game modes can be created from the above basic paradigm.
Plunge Match
Rounds are played out in a "best of N" or "First to N" fashion. The rounds end when all but one of the players drops to the ground. The winner is whoever did not drop. The runners up are taken in the order they fell (later = better). Since it may well be possible that players get good enough to stay up indefinitely, the time scaling will come into effect, making it harder to keep playing.
Ribbon Match
This game mode is an extension of Plunge Match. Each ninja trails a ribbon behind them. This ribbon represents the maximum length of grapple available to the ninja, and is used as the grapple rope. The object of the game is to cut other ninja's ribbons as short as possible without actually hitting the Ninja (the ninja will simply catch incoming stars, so the effect is negligible). When a ribbon is cut, the off-cut is attached to the length of the ninja who cut it. Ninjas cannot cut their own ribbons. Essentially this means that those Ninjas who have been cut very short will have a harder time of grappling successfully (they can only catch onto beams that are close and perpendicular to their velocity). At the same time, ninjas with long ribbons will be easy to cut from.
Visualization
Overview
As explained in the aims, it is often prudent to ignore game assets such as score, experience, health etc. since these aspects must be explained in non game terms. There is something elegant about being able to explain every aspect of a game within the context of that game. For example, a game of two teams where there are several tokens that much be collected and placed at their own base, and can be stolen from each other's bases one at a time describes CTF much more naturally that the current point based CTF does. This is because the possessive act of "capturing" a flag is better represented by visual objects in the game that describe the number of objects captured.
The design for this game has already stated that there is an aim to have no abstract factors involved, most prominently highlighted by ribbon match, where a would be abstract value (grapple length) is represented by an interactive visual entity (the length of the ribbon).
Visual Style
Non-photo realistic, since the movement will not look realistic. A non-photo realistic look allows players to assume that they cannot assume that anything will be realistic. It would be easy to fall back on Cel Shaded, Anime style characters to portray ninjas, but ninjas are associated with ancient china and Japan, and so it may be better to have some kind of elegant hand drawn or painted approach to indicate that: Something like Japanese Traditional Ink painting.
Animation
Ropes would aim to be as fluid and natural as possible, though, in fact, in coding terms they are fixed straight vectors. This is possibly something that betrays the aim of true representation, but probably not enough to affect a player's judgment.
Ribbons will be unaffected by gravity and trail exactly along the path taken by the ninja in free fall... they will, of course, act like grapple rope while used as grappling hooks.
"Rag Dolling" of characters is becoming common practice in games recently. Commonly they are used when the actions of the creature they have been applied to is unintelligent... i.e. the creature is dead. Since the player has no explicit control over the ninja (merely where the ninja grapples and hurls throwing stars), rag dolling will look fairly impressive as the ninja is swung by rope under the force of gravity, and flung chaotically through the air. This saves a lot of canned animation having to be done. To simulate the casting of the grapple hook and throwing of the ninja stars, impulses can be applied to the hands and arms. The body and legs will dangle naturally through the course of a swing while one or two arms are suspended from the rope. The only intelligent "limb" should be the head, which strives to look at its target... this is simply to imply that the character's body is not, in fact, dead.
Camera Concerns
The 2D version of the game would have a side on camera. Duh. It would still be plausible to present a scene with perspective, but due to the non-photo realistic look of the game, it would be prudent to have several parallax layers, and not too many things that stick into the screen which require perspective processing (since those things do not turn up in animated 2D art much).
The 3D camera would be third or first person. I'm sure I could be more imaginative than this, and point out that having such a limited field of view cuts the information feedback in half, but I doubt my sixth person perspective would really suit this game (I could be wrong). In fact I AM wrong. An almost isometric point of view of this cube of playing space would be optimal, with players simply using a cursor to aim at girders and enemies using a parallax error correcting system (defined in the K design document). Once concern is that adding one extra perspective to the game makes aiming exponentially hard. Making targets chunkier can combat this. The isometric point of view, however, would not give you an interpersonal feeling with your ninja... and having a following camera would give you a great feeling of speed.
I guess both approaches are plausible.
Sound and Music
Since the player is often in free fall, even though they have grappled onto a girder, sound effects may be extremely useful: The sound of a rope tugging taught will inform the player that they have reached the condition required to swing (rope perpendicular to velocity). Obviously, animation of the rope tugging taught from a curly fluid line to a straight one will also help people understand the distinction between swinging and falling while still attached.
A snapping effect will be useful to inform a player that their rope or ribbon has been cut, or that they have successfully cut someone else's ribbon or rope.
A bunch of totally awesome ninja battle grunts will be required also. These will be triggered when people fire ninja stars and let go of their ropes optionally.
A number of "rushing wind" noises of different intensity will help describe the speed of a player - it's already visually obvious, but it doesn't hurt to have sound embellish it.
Music would obviously be of ancient oriental origin to compliment the general style. 





